Guide rewrite (#10)
RimworldTogether/Guide: src/selfhosting/going-public.md

2. **Launch VPN**: Open the VPN application and activate it.
3. **Create a Network**: In the VPN app, create a new network with a unique name and strong password. Share these details with your friends.
4. **Join the Network**: Friends should install the VPN, join your network using the provided details, and get the VPN IP address.
5. **Configure the Server**: Paste the VPN IP into the server config file.
6. **Connect to the Server**: Use the VPN IP to connect to your server.

## LAN (Local Area Network)
For play within the same local network:

1. **Get Your Private IP**: Open a command prompt and type `ipconfig` to find your current network's IPv4 Address (e.g., `192.168.x.x`).
2. **Configure the Server**: Paste this private IP into your server config and start the server. Allow it through your private network firewall if prompted.
3. **Join the Server**: Use the private IP to connect to your server.

## Troubleshooting

For additional troubleshooting assistance, join our [Discord Server](https://discord.gg/NCsArSaqBW).

---

# Setting Up and Running the Server Linux Edition

Here's a step-by-step guide to set up and run your RimWorld Together server on Linux.

## Prerequisites

> Ensure you have Docker installed on your Linux system. If not, follow [this guide](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) to install Docker.

Reviewer: you dont need docker for that

Author: removed docker

## Download and Run the Server

Create a script with the following content to automatically download the latest release and run the server:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

# Variables
folder_name=RIM

> system_type=arm # possible values are arm (for Raspberry Pi), arm64, and x64

Reviewer: there should be a message above, that this should probably be changed

Reviewer 2: and is arm the best default option?

Reviewer 2: Update Fixed this comment on system type

Author: fixed and updated

# Get the latest release version tag
latest_tag=$(curl -sL https://api.github.com/repos/RimworldTogether/Rimworld-Together/releases/latest | grep tag_name | grep -o "[0-9\\.]*")

if [ -z "$latest_tag" ]; then
    echo "Latest tag couldn't be found"
    exit 1
fi

# Create directory and navigate into it
mkdir -p "$folder_name"
cd "$folder_name"

# Download the latest release for your system type
wget -S "https://github.com/RimworldTogether/Rimworld-Together/releases/download/$latest_tag/linux-$system_type.zip"
if [ ! -f "linux-$system_type.zip" ]; then
    echo "File couldn't be downloaded or wrong filename"
    exit 1
fi

# Unzip the downloaded file
unzip "linux-$system_type.zip"

# Start the server

> echo "quit" | ./GameServer

Reviewer: i think the comment with if you want to change settings should be there, as else the start before the screen would be necessary

screen -S RIMWORLD ./GameServer
```

Save this script as `start_server.sh` and make it executable:

```bash
chmod +x start_server.sh
```

Run the script to start your server:

```bash
./start_server.sh
```

## Renaming Mods

To rename mods, use the following Python script to handle invalid characters and ensure proper renaming. Place this script inside your mods folder:

```python
import os
import re
import xml.etree.ElementTree as ET

def sanitize_name(name):
    # Replace invalid characters with underscores
    return re.sub(r'[<>:"/\\|?*]', '_', name)

> required_path = "Required"

Reviewer: maybe you go through all 3 folders if available, else just the current folder=

for folder in os.listdir(required_path):
    folder_path = os.path.join(required_path, folder)
    if not os.path.isdir(folder_path):
        continue
    try:
        int(folder)
    except ValueError:
        continue
    about_path = os.path.join(folder_path, "About")
    if not os.path.isdir(about_path):
        continue
    xml_file = None
    if "About.xml" in os.listdir(about_path):
        xml_file = "About.xml"
    elif "about.xml" in os.listdir(about_path):

>         xml_file = "about.xml"

Reviewer: maybe rename the file, as it throws an error with Rimworld toghether (need to be uppercase), or ask, if it should rename

Author: fixed

    else:
        print(f"{folder}: About.xml not found")
        continue
    tree = ET.parse(os.path.join(about_path, xml_file))
    name = tree.getroot().find("name").text
    sanitized_name = sanitize_name(name)
    new_folder_name = f"{folder}-{sanitized_name}"
    new_folder_path = os.path.join(required_path, new_folder_name)
    os.rename(folder_path, new_folder_path)
    print(f"Renamed {folder} to {new_folder_name}")
```

Save this script as `rename_mods.py` and run it to rename your mods:

```bash
python rename_mods.py
```

> 

Reviewer: depending on the server, you still need to open the port, probably firewall-cmd --add-port:25555/tcp --permantent
and firewall-cmd --reload

Author: fixed

3. **Set Up Port Forwarding**: Navigate to the port forwarding section, typically found under "Advanced". Create a rule for TCP port 25555, assigning it to your IPv4 address, and save the configuration.

4. **Join the Server**: Use your public IP (discoverable via [WhatIsMyIPAddress](https://whatismyipaddress.com/)) to connect. Ensure the server is operational and the setup is correct.

## VPN Tunneling (Windows Only)
Use a VPN to simplify server sharing without complex router configurations:

1. **Download and Install VPN**: We recommend using [Radmin VPN](https://www.radmin-vpn.com/).
2. **Launch VPN**: Start the VPN service and create a network with a unique name and strong password.
3. **Invite Friends**: Share the network details with your friends so they can join.
4. **Connect to the Server**: Use the VPN-generated IP to establish a connection.

## LAN (Local Area Network)
For local network connections without internet:

1. **Get Your Private IP**: Retrieve your private IP using `ipconfig` (Windows) or `ip a` (Linux).
2. **Configure the Server**: Input the private IP into your server's configuration.

> 3. **Join the Server**: Connect using the private IP address. Ensure your firewall settings allow traffic on the server port.

Reviewer: maybe you have to enable that the devices are allowed to communicate in the router

Author: added new detail.information

- Execute the script to start your RimWorld Together server:

```bash
./start_server.sh
```

This script will:
- Automatically detect the architecture of your system and adjust the download URL accordingly.
- Fetch the latest version of the server software from the RimWorld Together GitHub repository.
- Unzip the server files into a specified directory and clean up the downloaded zip file.
- Start the server inside a `screen` session, which allows the server to run in the background and be reattached at any time.

NOTE: Make sure to also follow recommended patch note updates as this script does not automate it.

### 3. Renaming Mods with Python

Ensures proper naming conventions for mod directories:

```python
import os
import xml.etree.ElementTree as ET
import re

# Define the directory where mods are stored
required_path = "/path/to/your/mods"

def sanitize_filename(name):
    """ Sanitize filenames to remove characters that might cause issues in file systems. """
    return re.sub(r'[<>:"/\\|?*]', '_', name)

def find_correct_xml_file(files):
    """ Return 'About.xml' if present, otherwise the first XML file in the list. """
    if "About.xml" in files:

>         return "About.xml"```
>     return files[0] if files else None

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        return "About.xml"
    return files[0] if files else None```
```

Author: fixed lmao didn't even see this ahah

Reviewer: > fixed lmao didn't even see this ahah

the highlight didn't worked, thats why i have seen it

2. **Access Router Settings**: Enter the default gateway shown in your command output into a browser to modify your router’s settings.
3. **Set Up Port Forwarding**: In the router settings under "Advanced Settings", establish a new rule for TCP port 25555 linked to your noted private IP address. Confirm the changes.
4. **Configure Firewall on Linux**: Depending on which firewall management tool your distribution uses, apply the corresponding command:
   ```bash
   sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 25555 -j ACCEPT  # iptables
   sudo ufw allow 25555/tcp                              # UFW
   sudo firewall-cmd --add-port=25555/tcp --permanent    # firewalld
   sudo firewall-cmd --reload
   ```
5. **Join the Server**: Use your public IP to connect, ensuring everything is configured properly.

### Step 2: Automated Installation and Update Script

**1. Create the Startup Script**
- Create a file named `start_server.sh` with the following contents:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

# Define folder and system type
folder_name="RimWorldServer"  # Adjust folder name to preference

> system_type=$(uname -m)  # Auto-detects architecture

Reviewer: add possible values?

# Adjust system type based on architecture
case "$system_type" in
    x86_64) system_type="x64";;
    arm*) system_type="arm";;
    aarch64) system_type="arm64";;
    *) echo "Unsupported architecture"; exit 1;;
esac

# Fetch the latest release version tag from GitHub

> latest_tag=$(curl -s https://api.github.com/repos/RimworldTogether/Rimworld-Together/releases/latest | grep tag_name | grep -o "[0-9\\.]*")

Reviewer: why not -L ?

Author: fixed small minor error

Author: made fixes to avoid errors curl and wget

Reviewer: -L is, that is follows links. i think that is desirable.

Author: fixed to -sL due to wanting silent

if [ -z "$latest_tag" ]; then
    echo "Version not found."
    exit 1
fi

# Prepare the directory and download the server
mkdir -p "$folder_name"
cd "$folder_name" || exit
wget -q "https://github.com/RimworldTogether/Rimworld-Together/releases/download/$latest_tag/linux-$system_type.zip" -O server.zip
unzip -o server.zip && rm server.zip

# Start the server in a detached screen session
screen -S "RimWorldServer" -dm bash -c './GameServer; exec bash'
echo "Server running in screen session named 'RimWorldServer'."
```

**2. Save the Script**
- Save the above script into a file named `start_server.sh` on your Linux server.

**3. Make the Script Executable**
- Change the permissions of the script to make it executable by running:

```bash
chmod +x start_server.sh
```

**4. Run the Script to Start Your Server**
- Execute the script to start your RimWorld Together server:

```bash

> ./start_server.sh

Reviewer: is it to start the server? where is checked, that it justs starts ir, when the server is already installed

```

This script will:
- Automatically detect the architecture of your system and adjust the download URL accordingly.
- Fetch the latest version of the server software from the RimWorld Together GitHub repository.
- Unzip the server files into a specified directory and clean up the downloaded zip file.
- Start the server inside a `screen` session, which allows the server to run in the background and be reattached at any time.

NOTE: Make sure to also follow recommended patch note updates as this script does not automate it.

### 3. Renaming Mods with Python

Ensures proper naming conventions for mod directories:

```python
import os
import xml.etree.ElementTree as ET
import re

# Define the directory where mods are stored
required_path = "/path/to/your/mods"

def sanitize_filename(name):
    """ Sanitize filenames to remove characters that might cause issues in file systems. """
    return re.sub(r'[<>:"/\\|?*]', '_', name)

def find_correct_xml_file(files):
    """ Return 'About.xml' if present, otherwise the first XML file in the list. """

>     for file in files:
>         if file == "About.xml":
>             return "About.xml"

Reviewer: shouldn't that be
```suggestion
    if "About.xml" in files:
        return "About.xml"```

    return files[0] if files else None

# Process each directory in the mods directory
for folder in os.listdir(required_path):
    folder_path = os.path.join(required_path, folder)
    
    # Ensure the folder is a directory and has a numeric ID
    if not os.path.isdir(folder_path):
        continue
    try:
        int(folder)  # This checks if the folder name is an integer (mod ID)
    except ValueError:

>         continue  # Skip processing if the folder name is not an integer

Reviewer: why readded that? is probably not needed anymore, but doesnt harm

Author: lazy to remove doesn't harm.

---

## **Linux Server Setup and Management Guide for RimWorld Together**

### **1. Making Your Server Public**

#### **Port Forwarding (Advanced)**

> Port forwarding is necessary to allow external access to your server. This method requires familiarity with Linux command line and network settings:

Reviewer: if you setup it locally maybe? not that the users, that have a linux server, but don't use linux often, think that they need to do it too?

1. **Get Your Private IP**: Open a terminal and type `ip a` or `ifconfig` (depending on your distribution). Find the IPv4 address associated with your network interface (e.g., `eth0` or `wlan0`), which usually looks like `192.168.x.x`.
2. **Access Router Settings**: Type the default gateway address (found in the `ip a` or `ifconfig` output) into your web browser to access your router’s settings.
3. **Set Up Port Forwarding**: Navigate to the port forwarding section, often found under "Advanced Settings" in the router's interface. Create a new rule for TCP port 25555 (or another port if your setup differs), assigning it to the private IP address noted earlier. Save or apply the changes.
4. **Configure Firewall on Linux**: Ensure your Linux firewall allows traffic on the server port:
   ```bash
   sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 25555 -j ACCEPT  # For iptables
   sudo ufw allow 25555/tcp                              # For UFW (Uncomplicated Firewall)

>    ```

Reviewer: maybe add firewall-cmd to it? (and maybe tell which one is probably on which system)

Author: done

5. **Join the Server**: Connect to your server using the public IP address (find your public IP via websites like [WhatIsMyIPAddress](https://whatismyipaddress.com/)). Ensure your server is operational and that the port forwarding is correctly set up.

### **2. Automated Installation and Update Script**

This Bash script automates downloading, updating, and running the latest release of the RimWorld Together server on Linux:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

# Define variables
folder_name="RimWorldServer"
system_type=$(uname -m)  # Dynamically determines the system architecture

# Adjust system type for the download URL
case "$system_type" in
    x86_64) system_type="x64" ;;
    arm*) system_type="arm" ;;
    aarch64) system_type="arm64" ;;

>     *) echo "Unsupported architecture"; exit 1 ;;

Reviewer: maybe is unsupported or could be determined better? may add in the comment above, which one are available, if not detected properly? (because the output is formatted in another way)

Author: Made possible adjustments to fix/give out a response to possible "Unsupported architecture"

case "$system_type" in
    x86_64) system_type="x64" ;;
    arm*) system_type="arm" ;;
    aarch64) system_type="arm64" ;;
    *) echo "Unsupported architecture"; exit 1 ;;
esac

# Fetch the latest release version tag from GitHub
latest_tag=$(curl -sL https://api.github.com/repos/RimworldTogether/Rimworld-Together/releases/latest | grep tag_name | grep -o "[0-9\\.]*")

if [ -z "$latest_tag" ]; then
    echo "Latest tag couldn't be found"
    echo "Failed to find the latest version."
    exit 1
fi

# Create directory and navigate into it
# Prepare the installation directory
mkdir -p "$folder_name"
cd "$folder_name"

# Download the latest release for your system type
wget -S "https://github.com/RimworldTogether/Rimworld-Together/releases/download/$latest_tag/linux-$system_type.zip"
if [ ! -f "linux-$system_type.zip" ]; then
    echo "File couldn't be downloaded or wrong filename"
    exit 1
fi
cd "$folder_name" || exit

# Unzip the downloaded file
unzip "linux-$system_type.zip"
# Download and unzip the latest version
wget "https://github.com/RimworldTogether/Rimworld-Together/releases/download/$latest_tag/linux-$system_type.zip"
unzip -o "linux-$system_type.zip"

# Start the server

> echo "quit" | ./GameServer

Reviewer: i think it would be good, if it is later good to automatically change some configs settings

Author: might be an option in the future (currently can't heavily do this)

> screen -S "RimWorldServer" -dm bash -c './GameServer; exec bash'

Reviewer: there is a question, what the better way to handle the screen session

screen -S RIMWORLD ./GameServer
# Start the server in a new screen session
screen -S "RimWorldServer" -dm bash -c './GameServer; exec bash'
echo "Server started in a detached screen session."
```

Save this script as `start_server.sh` and make it executable:

```bash
chmod +x start_server.sh
```

Run the script to start your server:

```bash
./start_server.sh

> ```

Reviewer: why removed?

Author: cause im dumb and didn't realize I deleted lmao should be added

### **3. Renaming Mods with Python**

## Renaming Mods

To rename mods, use the following Python script to handle invalid characters and ensure proper renaming. Place this script inside your mods folder:
This Python script renames mod directories to their in-game names, helping manage mod files effectively:

```python
import os
import re
import xml.etree.ElementTree as ET
import re

def sanitize_name(name):
    # Replace invalid characters with underscores
def sanitize_filename(name):
    return re.sub(r'[<>:"/\\|?*]', '_', name)

required_path = "Required"
for folder in os.listdir(required_path):
    folder_path = os.path.join(required_path, folder)
    if not os.path.isdir(folder_path):
        continue
    try:
        int(folder)
    except ValueError:

>         continue

Reviewer: this is needed to check, that the folder is just an id, so if you add more mods later, you old renamed ones, dont get renamed again (or mods not from steam)

Author: done

>     xml_file = next((f for f in os.listdir(about_path) if f.lower() == "about.xml"), None)

Reviewer: what is with renaming, if it is not About.xml?

Author: done

if [ -f "$folder_name/$version_file" ] && grep -q "$latest_tag" "$folder_name/$version_file"; then
    echo "GameServer is up to date (version $latest_tag)."
else
    if [ "$auto_update" = true ]; then
        echo "Updating GameServer to version $latest_tag..."

        # Prepare the directory and download the server
        mkdir -p "$folder_name"
        cd "$folder_name" || { echo "Error: Could not change to directory $folder_name"; exit 1; }

        # Download the server files
        curl -L "https://github.com/RimworldTogether/Rimworld-Together/releases/download/$latest_tag/linux-$system_type.zip" -o server.zip
        if [ $? -ne 0 ]; then
            echo "Error: Download failed."
            exit 1
        fi

        # Unzip the server files
        unzip -o server.zip && rm server.zip
        if [ $? -ne 0 ]; then
            echo "Error: Unzipping the server files failed."
            exit 1
        fi

        # Save the version to the version file
        echo "$latest_tag" > "$version_file"
        echo "GameServer updated to version $latest_tag."
    else
        echo "New version $latest_tag available. Automatic update is disabled."

>         echo "To update manually, set 'auto_update' to true or run the script again after updating the 'auto_update' variable."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        echo "To update automatically, set 'auto_update' to true or update the server by hand."
```

>         exit 0

Reviewer: should it prevent you from start an old version or not? maybe a sleep that the user can decide?
